# Orthogtaphic Translator
Copyright 2022 Xavier Mercerweiss.

Converts pieces of text from one writing system to another based purely on the pronunciation of each word as expressed using the International Phonetic Alphabet. IPA data for any language may be utlized, and the characters associated with each phoneme as represented using the IPA may be altered. The IPA data and character mappings provided are designed around American English as spoken in the Western U.S. This data was sourced from <https://github.com/open-dict-data/ipa-dict>, and many thanks are given to that project's contributors.

The orthography provided alongside this project is the Feŋliʃ (Phenglish, Phonetic English) writing system, an orthography designed for American English in which every character represents exactly one sound, and every sound is represented by exactly one character. This project was created in order to facilitate the conversion of text into this orthography. This writing system is elaborated upon further in this document.

## Implementation
### Orthographer
The Orthogtapher class generates a Python dictionary mapping each word in the standard orthography with its equivalent in the provided orthography based on the pronunciation of each word. A file containing each word and its pronunciation expressed using the IPA must be provided. The exact characters used in the IPA data may not match the mapping dictionaries provided in `from_ipa.py`, potentially requiring manual modification of the mappings. The current mappings match the American International Phonetic Alphabet. The formatting of the produced dictionary may be modified.

### Translator
The Translator class replaces each word in the provided text with its mapping in the dictionary generated by the Orthographer, then formats the output. Text may be directly translated or read from TXT or PDF files. The output text may be written to a TXT file or directly returned. Formatting rules may be altered by the user.

## The Feŋliʃ Writing System
Feŋliʃ (Phenglish), short for phonetic English, is an alternative English writing system in which every letter makes exactly one sound and every sound is written using exactly one letter. The writing system heavily utilizes diacritical marks, though does not reflect the meanings of these marks in other languages. Several sounds represented by consonant pairs (ie: th, sh) are assigned characters not utilized in the Latin script, such as þ and ʃ.

NOTE: This writing system was created to reflect American English as spoken in the Western U.S., and will best reflect English as spoken in this region.

### Vowels
| Letter | US IPA Symbol | Sound |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| a | æ | ah, c**a**t, b**a**d |
| e | ɛ | eh, b**e**d, b**e**t |
| i | ɪ | ih, s**i**t, b**i**g, **E**ngland | 
| o | oʊ | oh, n**o**, h**o**pe, m**oa**t |
| u | ə, ʌ | uh, s**u**n, **a**bout, fr**o**m |
| ä | eɪ | ayy, c**a**ke, h**ey** |
| ë | i | ee, k**ee**p, sk**i**, b**ea**ch |
| ï | aɪ | eye, b**i**ke, m**y**, fl**y** |
| ö | aʊ | ow, d**ow**n, ab**ou**t |
| ü | u | yoo, c**u**te, f**ew**, y**ou** |
| ÿ | ɔɪ | oi, j**oi**n, b**oy**, c**oi**l |
| ā | ɑɹ | ar, c**ar**, st**ar**t |
| ē | ɝ, ɚ | er, aft**er**, col**or** |
| ī | ɪɹ | eer, h**ere**, m**irr**or, n**ear** |
| ō | ɔɹ, ʊɹ, ʊɚ | or, h**orr**or, w**arr**ior |
| ū | *Unused* | |
| ȳ | *Unused* | |
| à | ɛɹ, eɹ, ɛɚ, æɹ | air, c**arr**y, th**ere**, h**air** |
| è | *Unused* | |
| ì | *Unused* | |
| ò | ɔ, ɑ | aw, t**o**p, d**o**g, **o**ffice |
| ù | ʊ | uhh, l**oo**k, w**o**man, f**u**ll |
| ỳ | *Unused* | |

### Vowels
| Letter | US IPA Symbol | Sound |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| b | b | buh, **b**ut, ru**bb**er |
| d | d | duh, **d**og, roa**d** |
| k | k | ka, **c**at, **k**ite |
| c | tʃ | ch, **ch**air, **ch**annel, spee**ch** |
| l | ɫ | luh, **l**eft, **l**itt**le** |
| j | dʒ | juh, **g**in, **j**ump, **j**oin |
| r | ɹ | ruh, **r**un, **r**ug |
| t | t | tuh, **t**on, bu**tt** |
| p | p | puh, **p**un, s**p**in |
| f | f | fuh, **f**riend, **f**ries |
| h | h | huh, **h**am, **h**elp |
| g | g | guh, **g**um, **g**o |
| m | m | muh, **m**an, spas**m** |
| n | n | nuh, **n**ote, hidd**en** |
| ŋ | ŋ | nguh, si**ng**, ri**ng** |
| y | j | yuh, **y**ou, **y**oke, **y**um |
| s | s | suh, **s**et, i**ce** |
| v | v | vuh, **v**oice, na**v**el |
| z | z | zuh, **z**oom, **x**ylophone |
| w | w | wuh, **o**ne, **w**in |
| þ | θ, ð | th, wi**th**, **th**e |
| ʃ | ʃ | sh, **sh**out, **sh**eep |
| ξ | hw | whuh, **wh**ich, **wh**en |
| ʒ | ʒ | zhuh, vi**s**ion, trea**s**ure |

## Changelog
### Version 1.10 - Nov. 19th, 2022
- Public Release.

### Version 1.0 - Nov. 17th, 2022
- Initial Release.
